The healthcare industry is undergoing major changes in relation to patient medical records and technology. There are currently over 300 electronic medical records (EMRs) systems on the market in the United States. Many of these systems seek to solve record keeping and documentation issues in similar ways, yet few work cooperatively or are full integrated. While hospitals are required by law to have and maintain an electronic medical records system, few hospitals or healthcare networks operate with only one EMR in place. This contributes to a lack of continuity and ability to share. Patients records easily between facilities within a network (clinics, primary care, hospitals, urgent care) and even departments within single facilities.

Last fall, I began working with a local startup in healthcare technology. They had developed a system for storing and transferring patient records, an entirely new technology, but needed an interface designed for how to access and utilize those records. This was a significant task, as the scope of this project could be wide reaching. I was hired to create this design. I had to understand the users that this technology would be for, and understand more in-depth the problem that this technology was solving for healthcare systems and professionals. Our company partnered with local clinicians in family practice, as well as a local regional medical center, to implement our product and gain insight. To begin my work, I discussed the technology itself with our developers and technology officer, to have a complete picture of how it was supposed to work. With this understanding, I set about conducting my research.

First I completed my own competitive analysis of the product, creating a table of features, price points, integrations, and more for current patient records solutions on the market. This analysis gave me a deeper understanding of the fractured EMR market, and how systems are currently utilized – there is very little in the way of interoperability, which is also the key need for users. After a competitive analysis, I began writing lists of user stories. Some of these had already been written by our developer, but I reviewed and augmented them my understanding. I began conducting user interviews with the clinicians that we had already partnered with, and additional contacts form within our partner hospital, as I learned all of a patient record’s touchpoints within the healthcare facility and points of care. This was eye-opening again, as the process led me to additional questions about record handling and current systems used. I was also able to see examples of a variety of existing EMR tools and how they are currently used (seeing the 20% important, and the 80% dismissed) of each system. This gave me insight into the priorities for creating our MVP. 

From my interview notes and additional independent research (there is a wealth of information on EMRs in journal publications, government EMR UX guidelines, and more) I began the task of organizing my information. Document handling is the nature of our technology, and how users are able to retrieve, sort, and send specific documents was the focus of my interface design. Our technology served to bridge a gap in existing systems, not become a new one, so making it a simple process for uploading and finding information was most important. I began affinity mapping for document categories based on interview responses. This led me to a definitive list of around 9 categories, that could be further divided I concluded with either sort of tagging options, such as by date and time. At this stage I began conversations with my developer about search functionality and we arrived together at a decision that a form of document tagging would be necessary. I began drawing flows for the user stories I had written, and reviewing them with my developer as questions arose around certain technical aspects or our technology. 

From the flows, I began drafting wires on paper in my sketchbook. This is where a lot of creative juice gets flowing for me, and often where questions arise and I sometimes revisit or add on to my user flows. I like to draft a variety of solutions, often because one screen can address a variety of user tasks. For example, a home screen is a starting point for navigating anywhere else in a website or app, but some tasks should be readily available from this page, such as seeing notifications. The process of paper drafting wires continues until I feel I have a solid layout and can create a series of flows from it, at which point I test. In this case, I tested with my developers and colleagues, as well as our more integrated physicians. Feedback was positive (this was also still an MVP low fidelity prototype) and I moved into the stage of creating more polished wires. As I draft higher fidelity mockups, I inquire with my developers constantly for feedback or questions. Sometimes developers highlight an area I may have spent less time on or missed a consideration for—or ask about decisions I’ve made—and this is one of my favorite parts of the process, because I get to defend my work. Alternatively, and also fortunately, I get to learn about an error I’ve made or see a more efficient way of completing a task. This is also when I spend time tightening designs and making color and typography decisions and more, relying strongly on my graphic design background and color theory. This may take a few iterations, as I prefer to acquire feedback on aesthetic design from my colleagues as well as theoretical and actual users. This requires user testing after buttoning down prototypes. When testing was completed, I reworked necessary components. In this case, there were some backend changes to document categorization that solved a user need. Ultimately, the best design solution is what actually works for the user, not what I think works for the user. This is the feedback I most love receiving. 

While continuing to develop this product, and expand implementation, other issues have come up. Healthcare systems pose a variety of unique challenges when introducing new technology, particularly a difficulty in reaching widespread adoption due to a variety of factors. For this reason, it was most significant for me to create a simple, clean, and very easy to use interface that anyone – from an administrative clerk to a surgeon, could access with ease. True art is never finished, only abandoned, and for this reason it’s also important to continually revisit user needs, even re-evaluating who users are as a product evolves.
